Brady Lund: All right. Hello, everyone this week.
Brady Lund: this module. We are talking about information ethics.
Brady Lund: And this is obviously just a brief introduction. We are in an overview course. So we're just going to touch briefly on what information ethics is. But it's a major area of interest of mine. It is an area that could be an entire course of itself. And, in fact, if you are an undergraduate student, you may consider looking out for a class on cyber ethics that I have designed
Brady Lund: that will be offered in starting, I believe, fall 2025. That will touch on a lot of the topics in information ethics in further detail. So a very interesting area, very important area, as we mentioned in last modules, content, very core to what you're doing when you're working with information. Information management
Brady Lund: is information ethics.
Brady Lund: but a very large area as well. There are many different considerations, ethical considerations. When it comes to how we interact with information how we store information as you can imagine.
Brady Lund: So information, ethics, simply the ethical principles and ethical issues related to the entire lifecycle of information. So creation of information, dissemination and use of information, information, behavior, storing information being responsible with information.
Brady Lund: of course, it is important not only to just be able to effectively store information as efficiently as possible, but also to do so in a way that is ethical. Make sure that you're not exposing
Brady Lund: individuals to potential damage.
Brady Lund: Information has power, knowledge has power. We have a lot of proprietary information within organizations, particularly so when we talk about information ethics, we are talking about things ranging from privacy and security to data, quality, and transparency, to avoiding misinformation
Brady Lund: and guiding ethical use of information throughout the different information behaviors that people engage in.
Brady Lund: So here is just a few ethical principles that are important within
Brady Lund: our area of focus. And this is by no means comprehensive. As I said, you could spend a whole semester easily talking about all the ethical principles that are pertinent to interacting with information. But these are some of the more apparent and important ones that we have
Brady Lund: so accessibility.
Brady Lund: We have information. We're storing information within systems. But we know people who use information have different abilities, different interests, different backgrounds, and that can affect how they access information
Brady Lund: depending on our background. We may need
Brady Lund: assistive tools to access information. We may need
Brady Lund: additional guidance on how to access information from systems. We may use different language when we are trying to access information from systems. So the actual search queries we have may use different verbiage compared to what whoever created the information resources. Whoever created the metadata for those resources and organize the resources, and that could create certain barriers. So
Brady Lund: as we are working with information, we need to be conscious of certain barriers that may emerge and
Brady Lund: design curate information that is accessible to all these populations, so they're able to use it.
Brady Lund: Accuracy and quality could also go into this so ensuring that our information and data is reliable and truthful, so is it coming from reliable sources? Is it well cited, well sourced?
Brady Lund: Can it be trusted? Can it be used appropriately?
Brady Lund: These are aspects of ensuring the accuracy and quality of our information data.
Brady Lund: intellectual property rights. So we have to balance this to some extent with things like accessibility. Our ethical principles are not always
Brady Lund: entirely straightforward, because we have to balance various considerations, as you'll see below. We talk about things like privacy and transparency. Well, you have to balance these, and the same thing is true with accessibility and intellectual property rights.
Brady Lund: we have to ensure that the rights of content creators are maintained while also ensuring that users have access to the information they need. So we cannot. If material is copyrighted in the United States, we cannot just make it freely accessible to anyone on the
Brady Lund: Internet. But if we have certain rights to those materials, if we purchase rights to those materials, we can make them accessible to individuals within our organization subscribers.
Brady Lund: different administrators, employees of our organization. So we need to understand those rights and then do what we can within the context of those rights to make information resources, accessible
Brady Lund: privacy, so ensuring that individuals who interact with information or create information
Brady Lund: have control over that information so ensuring that that information is not vulnerable cannot be used by other people
Brady Lund: without the Creator's consent.
Brady Lund: Security, again, having information
Brady Lund: online stored in different systems and databases, we want to make sure that's not susceptible to breaches. Nobody can go in and collect that information without the consent of the Creator or the administrator of the system.
Brady Lund: and then transparency.
Brady Lund: So we want to ensure as much as possible that individuals are aware of how their data and information is being used by various technologies and by various organizations. And so if you think about all the information you create and share online through social media sites, through different repositories, where you upload information, and often with that sharing. We are not fully aware of how it's being used. How it can be used
Brady Lund: is information we're sharing on Facebook, for instance, being used to train. Facebook's Meta's large language models, their algorithms.
Brady Lund: That's information we want to make available to the users so they can make informed decisions about whether or not they want to actually share that information. In the 1st place.
Brady Lund: So why do we need information? Ethics? Well, ethics are critical from a practical standpoint in building trust.
Brady Lund: So whether or not we'd like to adhere to ethics. If we want to have people actually use our systems. If we want to have people actually come to our organization, our library and use it. We need to build trust, and people will be reluctant to adopt new technologies, share their information, enter a certain organization or library. If they believe the information that they're accessing is going to be misused or abused.
Brady Lund: When we learn about different breaches of data, the
Brady Lund: users of that organization of that system
Brady Lund: tend to diminish the stock prices of organizations that have data. Breaches tend to drop quite dramatically because people have lost trust. And if people have lost trust, they're not going to keep using that organization. They're not going to keep
Brady Lund: using that system any longer. They don't. They don't trust it. So.
Brady Lund: adhering to ethics, adhering to standards of privacy and security and transparency are critical for building that trust and maintaining that trust.
Brady Lund: Further, when we talk about breaches and biases in our privacy and security systems, in our analyses of data, even
Brady Lund: certain innate biases in how we analyze data, these are important, because if we make improper decisions based off data, if we
Brady Lund: leave our data open to risks where individuals can access it.
Brady Lund: Without having proper permissions.
Brady Lund: Then we potentially
Brady Lund: leave our organization open to irreparable damage. We potentially make decisions based off biased data that lead our organization down a wrong path that could lead to major financial repercussions or legal repercussions. And so
Brady Lund: beyond just wanting to build trust. We also have to think about what kind of damage because of this, do to our organization.
Brady Lund: and then simply, of course, to demonstrate our respect
Brady Lund: for our fellow people, for users.
Brady Lund: and to protect them as well as ourselves, because, you know, we're ethical people, and that's what we believe should be done right
Brady Lund: so to wrap up this section. I'd like to encourage you to take a few minutes to reflect on how information ethics will be important in your professional career.
Brady Lund: And think about this, regardless of what
Brady Lund: field you currently think you're going to go into. So maybe you're a psychology, major, and you're not going into information management. You're not going to work in a library. You're not going to work as a systems administrator. That's fine. But you're still going to be interacting with information regularly in your job. Let's say you want to be a psychiatrist, and that's your
Brady Lund: career ambition. Well, you're going to be interacting with medical documents. You're going to be interacting with patients who are obviously going to be sharing with you a lot of
Brady Lund: private information.
Brady Lund: So what would happen if you didn't take that private information and continue to ensure that it was private. What repercussions would that have for you? Would patients want to keep returning if they knew that that information was not being stored securely?
Brady Lund: So, regardless of what area you're working in. You're going to be encountering information in a myriad of ways. And you're going to want to ensure that you're handling that information ethically. So this week I'm encouraging you.
Brady Lund: even as you navigate some of our discussion activities, to think about it in that context. How is that important to you. How are these ethical principles going to be important in building trust and maintaining your role within organizations? And just in general, what do you think about these different ethics. I think it's important to have some civil discourse about our beliefs about these different ethics.
Brady Lund: regardless of where we stand on it. Why do you believe in a certain position in terms of, for instance, the balance between intellectual property rights and accessibility to information? So you may be a very firm believer that intellectual property rights should be maintained at all costs. You may believe that information should be accessible to everyone. I'd love to see debate and discussion about that in a civil manner.
Brady Lund: as we talk about ethics, because that's really at the core of ethics is the philosophy and the different perspectives, and figuring out what is best, to build trust what is best to ensure the proper handling of information.
Brady Lund: So that is information ethics.
Brady Lund: We will move on from here to talk a little bit about research and information science, and then wrap up our semester by talking about career opportunities. So
Brady Lund: thank you for listening to this lecture, and I will see you again shortly.